THIS IS FROM THE
OPENING SEQUENCE OF
EISENSTEIN'S FILM
"OCTOBER", MADE TO
COMMEMORATE THE RUSSIAN
REVOLUTION OF 1917.
THE SUCCESSION OF SHOTS,
CUT TOGETHER TO CONTRAST
IMAGES AND ANGLES OF
VISION IS CHARACTERISTIC
OF THE TECHNIQUE
KNOWN AS "MONTAGE".
HERE THE MASSIVE STATUE
OF A FORMER TSAR
IS BEING DEMOLISHED.
THE OLD REGIME IS BROUGHT DOWN
BY THE FORCES OF REVOLUTION.
THE SYMBOLISM IS EXPLICIT.
*
THE PURPOSE OF THE FILM
WAS TO CELEBRATE
THE TENTH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE REVOLUTION.
THOUSANDS OF LENINGRAD
FACTORY WORKERS WERE USED
IN THE MAKING OF THE
VAST CROWD SCENES
AROUND WHICH THE
NARRATIVE IS STRUCTURED.
THEY ARE THE PEOPLE,
THE PROLETARIAT,
THE REVOLUTIONARY MASS WHO
ARE THE HEROES OF THE FILM.
THIS IN ITSELF
IS SIGNIFICANT.
THE IDEA OF THE CROWD AS
COLLECTIVE HERO WAS IN
DIRECT OPPOSITION TO THE
KIND OF INDIVIDUAL HERO
TYPICAL OF THE
HOLLYWOOD STAR SYSTEM.
EISENSTEIN WANTED TO SHOW
THE PUBLIC LIFE OF THE MASS,
THE COLLECTIVE LIFE
OF THE STREET,
WHERE THE CITY IS THE
SITE OF REVOLUTION.
HERE THE REVOLUTIONARY
DEMONSTRATORS ARE BEING
FIRED ON BY FORCES OF THE
PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT
SUPPORTED BY THE
BOURGEOISIE.
*
AFTER THE EVENTUAL
VICTORY OF THE BOLSHEVIKS
IN OCTOBER 1917, WITH
THE DOWNFALL OF THE
PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT,
THE WHOLE STATUS OF "ART"
AND ITS PURPOSE WAS
CALLED INTO QUESTION.
BECAUSE EASEL PAINTING
HAD DEVELOPED UNDER THE
DEFEATED CAPITALIST
SYSTEM, IT WAS LINKED
TO THE DECADENCE
OF THE BOURGEOISIE
AND TO INDIVIDUAL
ENJOYMENT.
EXTENSIVE PRIVATE
COLLECTIONS, SUCH AS
THIS ONE OF MODERN
FRENCH ART CREATED BY THE
WEALTHY INDUSTRIALIST
SERGEI SHCHUKIN,
WERE NATIONALIZED AND PUT
INTO STATE MUSEUMS.
PHOTOGRAPHY, ON THE OTHER
HAND, CAME TO BE SEEN
AS AN APPROPRIATE
MEDIUM TO SERVE THE
COLLECTIVE NEEDS OF
THE NEW SOVIET SOCIETY.
IN THE 1920'S, ALEXANDER
RODCHENKO ADOPTED
THE TECHNIQUE
OF PHOTOMONTAGE -
ASSEMBLING DIFFERENT
PHOTOGRAPHIC FRAGMENTS
AND MOUNTING THEM
INTO A SINGLE IMAGE.
THE READY-MADE FRAGMENTS
OF PHOTOMONTAGE
ARE PUT TOGETHER IN UNUSUAL,
JARRING COMBINATIONS
WHERE SIZE AND SCALE ARE MADE
DELIBERATELY DISCONTINUOUS
TO CREATE
NEW MEANINGS.
THESE ILLUSTRATE A LOVE
POEM BY VLADIMIR MAYAKOVSKY.
HERE THE CITY IS SHOWN AS
THE MEDIUM THROUGH WHICH
MAYAKOVSKY'S TELEPHONE
CALL IS MADE.
IN FILM, THE IDEA OF
MONTAGE WAS ADAPTED
TO THE SPECIAL CHARACTER
OF THE MOVING IMAGE.
SHOTS WERE EDITED IN
VARYING SEQUENCES OF TIME.
THIS, FOR EXAMPLE,
IS FROM "STRIKE",
EISENSTEIN'S
FIRST MAJOR FILM.
IT SHOWS HERE WORKERS
MOVING LIKE SAND IN AN
EGG-TIMER THROUGH THE
NARROW FACTORY GATES,
THEN CUTS TO A
PIECE OF MACHINERY,
WHICH BECOMES SUPERIMPOSED
WITH STRIKING WORKERS
WHO ARE THE HEROES
OF THE FILM.
THE VISUAL IMPACT OF
MONTAGE DEPENDS ON A
SERIES OF "SHOCK EFFECTS"
WHICH, FOR EISENSTEIN,
MEANT THAT EACH
SUCCESSIVE IMAGE
HAD TO BE OF
MAXIMUM INTENSITY.
BUT HE ALSO MAINTAINED
THE ATTENTION OF
VIEWERS BY INCLUDING
COMIC INTERLUDES
REMINISCENT OF THE
CIRCUS OR THE MUSIC HALL.
IN THIS SEQUENCE FROM
"STRIKE" THE LEADER OF
A BAND OF PETTY THIEVES,
THE SO-CALLED "KING",
IS BEING VISITED ON THE
DERELICT OUTSKIRTS OF
THE CITY BY A SECRET
POLICEMAN IN THE PAY OF
THE FACTORY BOSSES
- THE CAPITALISTS.
BY PLAYING ON THE KING'S
VANITY AND SELF-IMPORTANCE
THE POLICEMAN IS ABLE
TO BUY HIS ASSISTANCE
AND RECRUIT HIS MOB
AS AGENT PROVOCATEURS
TO START UP TROUBLE
AND PROVIDE THE POLICE
WITH AN EXCUSE TO ATTACK
THE STRIKING WORKERS.
EISENSTEIN DELIBERATELY
PORTRAYS THESE OUTCASTS
AS A DEGENERATE
AND CRAVEN MOB -
THE FLOTSAM AND JETSAM
OF BOURGEOIS SOCIETY
WITH AN IMITATION KING
AND MAKE-BELIEVE EMPIRE.
THEIR COMIC UGLINESS
AND BIZARRE EXISTENCE
ARE USED AS A CONTRAST
TO THE GENUINE STRUGGLE
AND COLLECTIVE HEROISM
OF THE STRIKING WORKERS.
IN HIS FILMS, EISENSTEIN
TRIED TO AVOID USING
PROFESSIONAL ACTORS,
PREFERRING TO CAST FACES
OR PHYSICAL TYPES
TO SUIT A PART.
HE REJECTED ORTHODOX
STAGE ACTING WITH ITS
EMPHASIS ON THE
INDIVIDUAL BECAUSE OF
HIS COMMITMENT TO
SEEING THE INDIVIDUAL
AS ONLY A PART OF
A COLLECTIVE MASS.
BUT WHEN IT CAME TO
MAKING HIS FILM ABOUT
THE REVOLUTION A FEW
YEARS LATER, HE HAD TO
DEAL WITH THE PROBLEM OF
HOW TO REPRESENT LENIN.
EISENSTEIN TRIED TO SHOW
LENIN'S ROLE AS BEING
ONLY PART OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY PROCESS.
BUT HE DID USE A
LOOK-ALIKE, CASTING HIM
IN CONVENTIONAL
HEROIC POSES.
CRITICS ON THE LEFT
- MAYAKOVSKY FOR ONE -
OBJECTED TO WHAT THEY
CALLED THIS "FAKE LENIN",
WHICH THEY COMPARED TO THE
WORK OF "CLICHE PAINTERS".
GERASIMOV'S WORK IS
TYPICAL OF THIS KIND OF
SOCIALIST REALISM.
SUCH HEROIC CLICHES
SUITED THE CULT OF
LENIN'S PERSONALITY
BEING FOSTERED UNDER
THE STALINIST REGIME
AFTER LENIN'S DEATH.
AS A FILM MAKER, EISENSTEIN
USED INDIVIDUAL FACES
TO REPRESENT SOCIAL
CLASSES AND TYPES.
NOT IN A WAY WHICH SIMPLY
SET OUT TO REFLECT REALITY,
BUT AS COMPONENTS TO BE
ASSEMBLED IN MONTAGE.
IN THIS SCENE FROM
"OCTOBER",
AN ESCAPING BOLSHEVIK
DEMONSTRATOR,
DESPERATE TO SAVE HIS
BANNER, BECOMES TRAPPED
AMONGST BOURGEOIS
PLEASURE SEEKERS.
WHAT BEGINS WITH ALMOST
COMIC EXAGGERATION
QUICKLY TURNS TO EXTREME
VIOLENCE AS THE WOMEN
TURN ON HIM WITH
THEIR PARASOLS.
*
UNDERLYING THE STRUCTURE
OF EISENSTEIN'S
EPIC NARRATIVE ARE THE
SPACES OF THE CITY -
THE STREET, THE
HABITAT OF THE CROWD.
ST. PETERSBURG, THE
FORMER TSARIST CAPITAL,
IS THE SITE OF
REVOLUTION WHERE
THE MASSES
TRANSFORM THE CITY.
SO, THE STORY OF
"OCTOBER" UNFOLDS
IN PLACE AS WELL
AS IN TIME.
IN ORDER TO STOP
THE ESCAPE OF THE
REVOLUTIONARY DEMONSTRATORS,
THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT
ORDERS THE
WORKER'S DISTRICT
TO BE CUT OFF FROM
THE CENTRAL CITY
BY RAISING THE BRIDGES
OVER THE RIVER NEVA.
THE RUPTURE OR SPLIT
BETWEEN THE BOURGEOIS
AND WORKING CLASSES IS
DRAMATICALLY REPRESENTED.
THESE ARE POWERFUL IMAGES,
INTENSIFIED BY THE
UNEXPECTED JUXTAPOSITION
OF HUMAN TRAGEDY
WITH THE FORMAL DETAILS OF
THE BRIDGE'S IRON STRUCTURE.
*
EISENSTEIN SET IMAGES
AGAINST EACH OTHER -
IN CONTRAST, OR WHAT HE
LIKED TO CALL "COLLISION".
AND, CENTRAL TO THE
STRUCTURE OF "OCTOBER"
IS THE CONTRAST EISENSTEIN
SETS UP BETWEEN
THE PUBLIC TERRAIN
OF THE STREETS
AND THE GUARDED INTERIOR
OF THE WINTER PALACE.
THIS, THE FORMER TZAR'S
PALACE, HAD BECOME
THE HEADQUARTERS
OF THE BOURGEOIS
PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT,
LED BY KERENSKY.
SIGNIFICANTLY, HE
MAKES THE DEFENDERS
OF THE INTERIOR A
BATTALION OF WOMEN.
ALTHOUGH SUCH A
BATTALION EXISTED,
EISENSTEIN EXAGGERATED
ITS HISTORICAL ROLE
FOR THE SAKE OF THE
FILM'S SYMBOLISM.
*
THOUGH SOLDIERS, THEY
ARE SHOWN TO BE MAKING
THEIR MAKESHIFT BARRACKS,
THE FORMER TZAR'S
BILLIARD ROOM, INTO
A SORT OF BOUDOIR.
THE WOMEN APPEAR AS
CONFUSING FIGURES OF
TRANSITION BETWEEN A
BOURGEOIS WORLD
AND REVOLUTION.
THESE IMAGES OF WOMEN
ARE CONTRASTED WITH THE
POSITIVE LIBERATING FORCE
OF THE COLLECTIVE MASS,
AND OF THE MALE
REVOLUTIONARY WHO IS
THE EMBLEM OF "OCTOBER".
*
LOOKING AT FILMS
ON TELEVISION,
PROBABLY AT HOME, IS
VERY DIFFERENT FROM
THE COLLECTIVE EXPERIENCE
OF GOING TO THE CINEMA.
IN THE 1920'S MANY
SOVIET FILM MAKERS
SELF-CONSCIOUSLY
ANALYZED WHAT THEY SAW
AS THE PARTICULAR
LANGUAGE OF FILM.
THIS LED THEM TO REVEAL
RATHER THAN CONCEAL THE
TECHNIQUES OF FILM MAKING
- DRAWING ATTENTION, EVEN,
TO THE PROCESS
OF VIEWING A FILM.
"MAN WITH A MOVIE CAMERA"
BY DZIGA VERTOV BEGINS BY
SHOWING THE RAW MATERIAL
OF FILM ITSELF.
FOLLOWED BY THE CINEMATIC
CONCEIT OF PRESENTING
THE VIEWERS WITH
THEIR OWN SELF IMAGE.
FOR THE CINEMA GOER THIS
SET THE TERMS THAT THEY
WERE PART OF A
COLLECTIVE EXPERIENCE -
BOTH THE SUBJECT OF THE
FILM AND ITS AUDIENCE.
VERTOV'S FILM "MAN WITH A
MOVIE CAMERA" IS ABOUT A
DAY IN THE LIFE OF A CITY
- IN THIS CASE MOSCOW,
THE SOVIET CAPITAL.
FOR A DOCUMENTARY
FILM MAKER LIKE VERTOV,
FILMS SHOULD NOT BE
"PLAYED" OR "ACTED" AT ALL.
HE SAW HIMSELF AS THE
"CAMERA EYE" WHO FILMED
LIFE AS IT HAPPENED
IN THE MODERN CITY.
THIS SEQUENCE DEALS
WITH A STREET ACCIDENT.
WE NEVER ACTUALLY
SEE THE ACCIDENT BUT,
THROUGH MONTAGE, VERTOV
ASSEMBLED A SERIES
OF FRAGMENTED
DISORIENTATING EFFECTS
THAT SIMULATE
THE EXPERIENCE.
ONCE THE AMBULANCE HAS
BEEN CALLED, VERTOV FILMS
THE "MAN WITH THE MOVIE
CAMERA" PURSUING IT.
THE WHOLE FILM IS ABOUT
THE PROCESS OF FILM MAKING
AND ITS RELATION
TO MODERN LIFE.
IT DID NOT SIMPLY
RECORD EVENTS BUT
EXPOSED THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN NORMAL WAYS
OF LOOKING AND THE
MECHANICAL CAMERA EYE.
THROUGH MONTAGE, VERTOV
MADE THE FAMILIAR APPEAR
IN AN UNFAMILIAR WAY.
CUTTING TOGETHER
DIFFERENT IMAGES OF WORK
- WOMEN PACKING CIGARETTES,
WORKING AT A SWITCHBOARD
- VERTOV
JUGGLED CONTEXTS.
THROUGH A CHAIN
OF ASSOCIATIONS,
ROUTINE, RHYTHM AND
REPETITION WERE SHOWN AS
TYPICAL FEATURES OF
MODERNITY AND FORMAL
ANALOGIES CONNECT THE
MANUAL WITH THE MECHANICAL.
THOUGH COMMITTED TO
DOCUMENTARY FILM MAKING,
VERTOV PRESENTED HIS
AUDIENCE WITH A HIGHLY
SELECTIVE VIEW OF MOSCOW,
DWELLING ON THOSE ASPECTS
WHICH FITTED HIS
VIEW OF MODERNITY.
AND HE MADE THE
RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN MODERNITY
AND MONTAGE EXPLICIT
IN HIS HIGHLY
SELF-CONSCIOUS TECHNIQUE.
EISENSTEIN OBJECTED TO
VERTOV'S FORMALISM,
WHAT HE SAW AS MERELY
THE DISPLAY OF TRICKS,
JUST AS VERTOV CRITICIZED
EISENSTEIN'S USE OF
NARRATIVE FOR RECREATING
HISTORICAL EVENTS.
BUT WHAT "MAN WITH A MOVIE
CAMERA" HAS IN COMMON
WITH "OCTOBER" IS
THE FOCUS ON THE MASS -
THE CROWD IN THE CITY.
THERE IS A
DIFFERENCE, THOUGH.
VERTOV'S FILM HAS
ANOTHER HERO AS WELL.
THE CAMERAMAN HIMSELF,
SUPERIMPOSED OVER
THE ANONYMOUS
URBAN MASS.
THIS CONCERN WITH THE
CITY WAS NOT CONFINED
TO SOVIET DIRECTORS.
IN 1927, THE GERMAN,
WALTER RUTTMAN, MADE A
FILM CALLED "BERLIN, THE
SYMPHONY OF A GREAT CITY".
ALTHOUGH WORKING IN A
VERY DIFFERENT SOCIAL
AND POLITICAL CONTEXT TO
EISENSTEIN AND VERTOV,
RUTTMAN'S DOCUMENTARY
ALSO FOCUSED ON
A CROSS-SECTION OF
THE MODERN CITY.
PRE-DATING VERTOV'S
FILM BY TWO YEARS,
IT RECORDED A DAY IN
THE LIFE OF BERLIN,
FROM MORNING TIL NIGHT.
AS CITY LIFE GETS UNDERWAY
SHUTTERS ARE RAISED.
BERLIN IS REVEALED AS
A CITY OF COMMERCE.
BUT THE INHABITANTS OF
THE CITY REMAIN ANONYMOUS.
OFFICE WORKERS, OBLIVIOUS
OF THE CAMERA,
ENTER A BUILDING
FITTED WITH
MODERN MECHANICAL
ELEVATORS.
RUTTMAN SAW THE TEMPO OF
MODERN LIFE AS INHERENT
IN THESE IMAGES,
WHERE THE CUTTING IS
RHYTHMICAL, INCREASINGLY
RAPID AND STACCATO.
THE EFFECT OF THE MONTAGE
IS TO CONNECT THE
REPETITIVE FORMS OF
MODERN OFFICE WORK
WITH MODERN MACHINERY.
THE CRITICISM LEVELED AT
RUTTMAN EVEN BY HIS OWN
COLLEAGUES WHILE
WORKING ON THE FILM
WAS HIS POLITICAL
NEUTRALITY.
RUTTMAN SAW HIMSELF
AS A NEUTRAL OBSERVER,
UNENGAGED WITH THE POLITICAL
CONTENT OF HIS IMAGES.
IN THIS SEQUENCE,
FORMAL IMAGES OF A
SWIRLING MOTION
DEVELOP INTO A VORTEX.
THESE SEEMINGLY DISPARATE
IMAGES ARE CONNECTED ONLY
BY THIS MOVEMENT
OF ROTATION.
EVEN A SUICIDE BECOMES
MERELY ANOTHER ASPECT
OF THE VISUAL TEXTURE
OF THE CITY'S SURFACE,
ANOTHER IMAGE
OF ROTATION.
WHETHER OBSERVING THE
TENSIONS OF CITY LIFE
OR ITS ENTERTAINMENTS,
IT WAS THESE FORMAL
ANALOGIES WHICH PRIMARILY
CONCERNED RUTTMAN.
HERE THE MOVEMENTS OF THE
DANCERS' ARMS AND LEGS
ECHO THE RHYTHMS
OF MACHINERY.
THE ORIGINAL MUSIC
COMPOSED BY EDMUND MEISEL
TO ACCOMPANY THE FILM HAS
NOW BEEN LOST, BUT THE
"SYMPHONY" OF THE FILM'S
TITLE REFERRED TO
RUTTMAN'S SENSE OF THE
MUSICALITY OF THE CITY,
REVEALED IN THE
RHYTHM OF MONTAGE.
THIS IS PART OF THE
FINAL SEQUENCE AT NIGHT.
IT'S A EULOGY TO ARTIFICE
AND THE SPECTACLE OF NEON;
TO THE IMAGES OF
DISPLAY AND CONSUMPTION.
HERE RUTTMAN'S USE
OF MONTAGE PRESENTS
A DIFFERENT ASPECT OF
MODERNITY TO THAT OF
THE SOVIET FILM MAKERS.
BUT IT IS STILL A
COLLECTIVE FANTASY
LIVED OUT IN PUBLIC
- AND ONE WHICH DEALS
NOT ONLY WITH PEOPLE,
BUT THE SPACES
OF THE CITY ITSELF.
AND IT WAS THROUGH MONTAGE
- THE WAY FILM WAS ASSEMBLED
- THAT THIS IMAGE OF
MODERNITY WAS PROJECTED.
*